What to do to get good rec letters: if you’re in class, do extra things. Do really well in class, speak up in class, work well with others, but also go visit them in office hours, be curious about the material, go above and beyond in assigned projects and see if you can get an independent project going. A lot of these should come naturally: if you’re interested in the material and willing to work hard on it these things come through. But don’t be afraid to visit in office hours and propose an independent project. Go visit in office hours so the professor knows who you are. Seriously. (The situation is complicated in larger universities where this isn’t as much of an option as it is at small liberal arts schools. I don’t actually know how rec letters work in these environments, unfortunately.
ow to get good rec letters in research: I’m not sure, actually. What seems to work is to show all of the qualities that you’re going to need to grad school, especially a sense of independence, drive, persistence, and initiative. Ability to work independently and generate new ideas is probably the most important thing you can demonstrate. And it’s not like you’re going to be demonstrating that off the bat (… I had so many problems with working independently in the beginning. So many problems.) but you’re all 18-year olds (… apparently I am aiming this at a new undergrad audience! Doesn’t surprise me, actually) so they don’t expect you to know what you’re doing. I will emphasize that again: professors do not expect 18-year-olds to know what they’re doing, and that’s why they want you to stay in the lab awhile, so that you can figure it out. Of course, if you do know what you’re doing, either because you’ve done some research in high school or you’re a quick study, then you’re going to be a star and start getting assigned PhD-level work when you’re an undergrad. Which puts you in a prime position for grad school, and those are the people who get in without taking a few years off to do extra research.
